=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

perlfaq - Häufig gestellte Fragen zu Perl

=head1 BESCHREIBUNG

Die perlfaq enthält einige Dokumente, die die am häufigsten über Perl und 
Perl-Programmierung gestellten Fragen beantworten. Sie sind anhand des Themas
in 9 Hauptabschitte eingeteilt, die in diesem Dokument umrissen werden.

=head2 Wo findet man die perlfaq?

Die (englischsprachigen) perlfaq werden mit der Standard-Perl-Distribution
mitgeliefert. Also solltest Du die perlfaq haben, wenn Du Perl hast. Du solltest
auch das C<perldoc> Tool haben, mit dem Du die L<perlfaq> lesen kannst:

    $ perldoc perlfaq

Neben Deinem lokalen System, kannst Du die perlfaq auch im Web finden, unter
anderem bei http://perldoc.perl.org/ .

Die perlfaq ist ein sich ständig änderndes Dokument und Du kannst die aktuellste
Version unter http://faq.perl.org/ lesen. Die perlfaq-workers posten Auszüge aus
der aktuellsten perlfaq unter comp.lang.perl.misc.

Du kannst die Quellen (der englischsprachigen perlfaq) unter 
https://github.com/briandfoy/perlfaq ansehen (das außerhalb der eigentlichen
Perl Sourcen ist). Das git Repository schreibt alle Änderungen an den FAQ mit
und enthält die aktuellste Version der Dokumente und kann sich stark von der
Version unterscheiden, die mit der aktuellsten Perl-Version mitgeliefert wird.
Bitte prüfe das Repository bevor Du Deine Korrekturen schickst.

=head2 Wie kann ich etwas zu den perlfaq beitragen

Du kannst Korrekturen, Erweiterungen und Vorschläge an 
C<< <perlfaq-workers AT perl DOT org > >> mailen. Die perlfaq-Freiwilligen
benutzen diese Adresse um ihre Bemühungen zu koordinieren und die Entwicklung
der perlfaq zu verfolgen.
Sie schätzen Deine Beiträge, haben aber nicht genug Zeit, um individuelle
Hilfestellungen zu geben. Benutze diese Adresse also bitte nicht um FAQs zu
fragen.

Der perlfaq Server veröffentlicht Auszüge der perlfaq in der Newsgroup alle
6 Stunden (so ungefähr), und die Gemeinschaft der Freiwilligen sehen das durch
und aktualisieren die Antworten. Wenn Du bei der Durchsicht und der Aktualisierung
der Fragen helfen willst, schau Dir comp.lang.perl.misc an.

Du kannst auch das git repository der perlfaq forken und eine "pull"-Anfrage
schicken, so dass das Hauptrepository Deine Änderungen übernehmen kann. Das
Repository ist hier zu finden:

    https://github.com/briandfoy/perlfaq

=head2 Was passiert, wenn Du Deine Perl-Programmierung Probleme an die Autoren mails?



The perlfaq-workers like to keep all traffic on the perlfaq-workers list
so that everyone can see the work being done (and the work that needs to
be done). The mailing list serves as an official record. If you email the
authors or maintainers directly, you'll probably get a reply asking you
to post to the mailing list. If you don't get a reply, it probably means
that the person never saw the message or didn't have time to deal with
it. Posting to the list allows the volunteers with time to deal with it
when others are busy.

If you have a question that isn't in the FAQ and you would like help with
it, try the resources in L<perlfaq2>.

=head1 VERDIENSTE

Tom Christiansen hat die Original-perlfaq geschrieben und dann mit der Hilfe
von Nat Torkington erweitert. Die perlfaq-workers pflegen die aktuellen
Dateien und Teilnehmer von comp.lang.perl.misc prüfen und aktualisieren die FAQ.
Etliche Leute haben Antworten, Berichtigungen und Kommentare beigetragen und
die perlfaq nennt diese Beiträge wo immer es angebracht ist.

=head1 AUTOR UND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 1997-2009 Tom Christiansen, Nathan Torkington und andere
Autoren wie genannt. Alle Rechte vorbehalten.

Tom Christiansen hat die Original-Version dieses Dokuments geschrieben.
brian d foy C<< <bdfoy@cpan.org> >> hat diese Version geschrieben. Sie auch
die einzelnen perlfaq Dokumente für weitere Copyright informationen.

Dieses Dokument ist unter den gleichen Bedingungen wie Perl selbst verfügbar.
Code-Beispiele in allen perlfaq Dokumenten sind Gemeingut. Benutze sie wenn
sie passen, auf eigene Gefahr mit keiner Garantie von irgendjemandem.

=head1 INHALTSVERZEICHNIS

=over 4

=item perlfaq  - Dieses Dokument

=item perlfaq1 - Allgemeine Fragen zu Perl

=item perlfaq2 - Bezugsquellen und Dokumentation

=item perlfaq3 - Programmierwerkzeuge

=item perlfaq4 - Datenverarbeitung

=item perlfaq5 - Dateien und Formate

=item perlfaq6 - Reguläre Ausdrücke

=item perlfaq7 - Perl-idiomatischer Sprachgebrauch

=item perlfaq8 - Systeminteraktion

=item perlfaq9 - Netzwerke

=back

=head1 Die Fragen

=head2 L<perlfaq1>: Allgemeine Fragen zu Perl

Sehr allgemeine, high-level Fragen zu Perl.

=over 4

=item *

Was ist Perl?

=item *

Wer unterstützt Perl?  Wer entwickelt es?  Warum ist es frei?

=item *

Welche Version von Perl sollte ich benutzen?

=item *

Was ist Perl 4, Perl 5 oder Perl 6?

=item *

Was war Ponie?

=item *

Was ist Perl 6?

=item *

Wie stabil Perl?

=item *

Ist Perl schwierig zu (er)lernen?

=item *

Wie ist Perl im Vergleich zu anderen Sprachen wie Java, Python, REXX, Scheme oder Tcl?

=item *

Kann ich [Aufgabe] in Perl erledigen?

=item *

Wann sollte ich nicht in Perl programmieren?

=item *

Was ist der Unterschied zwischen "perl" und "Perl"?

=item *

Ist es ein Perl-Programm oder ein Perl-Skript?

=item *

Was ist ein JAPH?

=item *

Wo kann ich eine Liste von Larry Walls Witzeleien finden?

=item *

Wie kann ich andere überreden, Perl zu benutzen?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq2>: Bezugsquellen und Dokumentation

Wo die Sourcen und die Dokumentation von Perl, Support und verwandte Angelegenheiten
zu finden sind.

=over 4

=item *

Welche Maschinen unterstützt Perl? Wo bekomme ich es her?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine Binär-Version von Perl bekommen?

=item *

Ich habe keinen C-Compiler. Wie kann ich meinen eigenen Perl-Interpreter bauen?

=item *

Ich habe den Perl-Interpreter von einer Maschine auf eine andere kopiert, aber Skripte
funktionieren nicht.

=item *

Ich habe die Sourcen geholt und versucht, diese zu kompilieren, 
aber gdbm/dynamic loading/malloc/linking/... ist fehlgeschlagen.
Wie kann ich es zum Laufen bringen?

=item *

Welche Module und Erweiterungen sind für Perl erhältlich? Was ist CPAN? Was bedeutet CPAN/src/...?

=item *

Gibt es eine ISO- oder ANSI-zertifizierte Version von Perl?

=item *

Wo kann ich Informationen über Perl finden?

=item *

Welche Perl newsgroups gibt es im Usenet? Wo stelle ich Fragen?

=item *

Wo sollte ich Source Code einstellen?

=item *

Perl Bücher

=item *

Welche Magazine haben Perl-Inhalte

=item *

Welche Mailinglisten gibt es über Perl?

=item *

Wo sind die Archive von comp.lang.perl.misc?

=item *

Wo kann ich eine Kommerzielle Version von Perl kaufen?

=item *

Wo kann ich Bug-Reports hinschicken?

=item *

Was ist perl.com? Perl-Mongers? pm.org? perl.org? cpan.org?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq3>: Programmierwerkzeuge

Programmierwerkzeuge und Unterstützung bei der Programmierung.

=over 4

=item *

Wie mache ich (irgendwas)?

=item *

Wie kann ich Perl interaktiv benutzen?

=item *

Gibt es eine Perl shell?

=item *

Wie finde ich heraus, welche Module auf meinem System installiert sind?

=item *

Wie debugge ich meine Perl-Programme?

=item *

Wie profile ich meine Perl-Programme?

=item *

Wie erstelle ich Querverweise meiner Perl-Programme?

=item *

Is there a pretty-printer (formatter) for Perl?

=item *

Is there a ctags for Perl?

=item *

Is there an IDE or Windows Perl Editor?

=item *

Where can I get Perl macros for vi?

=item *

Where can I get perl-mode for emacs?

=item *

How can I use curses with Perl?

=item *

How can I write a GUI (X, Tk, Gtk, etc.) in Perl?

=item *

How can I make my Perl program run faster?

=item *

How can I make my Perl program take less memory?

=item *

Is it safe to return a reference to local or lexical data?

=item *

How can I free an array or hash so my program shrinks?

=item *

How can I make my CGI script more efficient?

=item *

How can I hide the source for my Perl program?

=item *

How can I compile my Perl program into byte code or C?

=item *

How can I get C<#!perl> to work on [MS-DOS,NT,...]?

=item *

Can I write useful Perl programs on the command line?

=item *

Why don't Perl one-liners work on my DOS/Mac/VMS system?

=item *

Where can I learn about CGI or Web programming in Perl?

=item *

Where can I learn about object-oriented Perl programming?

=item *

Where can I learn about linking C with Perl?

=item *

I've read perlembed, perlguts, etc., but I can't embed perl in my C program; what am I doing wrong?

=item *

When I tried to run my script, I got this message. What does it mean?

=item *

What's MakeMaker?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq4>: Datenverarbeitung

Verarbeitung von Zahlen, Daten, Strings, Arrays, Hashes und verschiedene Daten-Sachen.

=over 4

=item *

Warum bekomme ich lange Dezimalzahlen (z.B. 19,9499999999999) anstatt der Zahl, die ich bekommen sollt (z.B. 19,95)?

=item *

Warum ist int() defekt?

=item *

Warum werden meine Oktal-Daten nicht korrekt interpretiert?

=item *

Hat Perl eine round() Funktion? Was ist mit ceil() und floor()? Trigonometrische Funktionen?

=item *

Wie kann ich zwischen numerischen Darstellungen/Basen/Zahlensystem umwandeln?

=item *

Warum funktioniert & nicht so wie ich es will?

=item *

Wie kann ich Matrizen mulitplizieren?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine Operation auf eine Reihe von Integern anwenden?

=item *

Wie kann ich römische Zahlen ausgeben?

=item *

Warum sind meine Zufallszahlen nicht zufällig?

=item *

Wie bekomme ich eine Zufallszahl zwischen X und Y?

=item *

Wie bekomme ich den Tag oder die Woche des Jahres?

=item *

Wie bekomme ich das aktuelle Jahrhundert oder Jahrtausend?

=item *

Wie kann ich zwei Daten vergleichen und die Differenz bekommen?

=item *

Wie kann ich einen String nehmen und in Epochensekunden umwandeln?

=item *

How can I find the Julian Day?

=item *

How do I find yesterday's date?

=item *

Does Perl have a Year 2000 problem? Is Perl Y2K compliant?

=item *

How do I validate input?

=item *

How do I unescape a string?

=item *

How do I remove consecutive pairs of characters?

=item *

How do I expand function calls in a string?

=item *

How do I find matching/nesting anything?

=item *

How do I reverse a string?

=item *

How do I expand tabs in a string?

=item *

How do I reformat a paragraph?

=item *

How can I access or change N characters of a string?

=item *

How do I change the Nth occurrence of something?

=item *

How can I count the number of occurrences of a substring within a string?

=item *

How do I capitalize all the words on one line?

=item *

How can I split a [character] delimited string except when inside [character]?

=item *

How do I strip blank space from the beginning/end of a string?

=item *

How do I pad a string with blanks or pad a number with zeroes?

=item *

How do I extract selected columns from a string?

=item *

How do I find the soundex value of a string?

=item *

How can I expand variables in text strings?

=item *

What's wrong with always quoting "$vars"?

=item *

Why don't my E<lt>E<lt>HERE documents work?

=item *

What is the difference between a list and an array?

=item *

What is the difference between $array[1] and @array[1]?

=item *

How can I remove duplicate elements from a list or array?

=item *

How can I tell whether a certain element is contained in a list or array?

=item *

How do I compute the difference of two arrays?  How do I compute the intersection of two arrays?

=item *

How do I test whether two arrays or hashes are equal?

=item *

How do I find the first array element for which a condition is true?

=item *

How do I handle linked lists?

=item *

How do I handle circular lists?

=item *

How do I shuffle an array randomly?

=item *

How do I process/modify each element of an array?

=item *

How do I select a random element from an array?

=item *

How do I permute N elements of a list?

=item *

How do I sort an array by (anything)?

=item *

How do I manipulate arrays of bits?

=item *

Why does defined() return true on empty arrays and hashes?

=item *

How do I process an entire hash?

=item *

How do I merge two hashes?

=item *

What happens if I add or remove keys from a hash while iterating over it?

=item *

How do I look up a hash element by value?

=item *

How can I know how many entries are in a hash?

=item *

How do I sort a hash (optionally by value instead of key)?

=item *

How can I always keep my hash sorted?

=item *

What's the difference between "delete" and "undef" with hashes?

=item *

Why don't my tied hashes make the defined/exists distinction?

=item *

How do I reset an each() operation part-way through?

=item *

How can I get the unique keys from two hashes?

=item *

How can I store a multidimensional array in a DBM file?

=item *

How can I make my hash remember the order I put elements into it?

=item *

Why does passing a subroutine an undefined element in a hash create it?

=item *

How can I make the Perl equivalent of a C structure/C++ class/hash or array of hashes or arrays?

=item *

How can I use a reference as a hash key?

=item *

How do I handle binary data correctly?

=item *

How do I determine whether a scalar is a number/whole/integer/float?

=item *

How do I keep persistent data across program calls?

=item *

How do I print out or copy a recursive data structure?

=item *

How do I define methods for every class/object?

=item *

How do I verify a credit card checksum?

=item *

How do I pack arrays of doubles or floats for XS code?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq5>: Files and Formats

I/O and the "f" issues: filehandles, flushing, formats, and footers.

=over 4

=item *

How do I flush/unbuffer an output filehandle?  Why must I do this?

=item *

How do I change, delete, or insert a line in a file, or append to the beginning of a file?

=item *

How do I count the number of lines in a file?

=item *

How can I use Perl's C<-i> option from within a program?

=item *

How can I copy a file?

=item *

How do I make a temporary file name?

=item *

How can I manipulate fixed-record-length files?

=item *

How can I make a filehandle local to a subroutine?  How do I pass filehandles between subroutines?  How do I make an array of filehandles?

=item *

How can I use a filehandle indirectly?

=item *

How can I set up a footer format to be used with write()?

=item *

How can I write() into a string?

=item *

How can I open a filehandle to a string?

=item *

How can I output my numbers with commas added?

=item *

How can I translate tildes (~) in a filename?

=item *

How come when I open a file read-write it wipes it out?

=item *

Why do I sometimes get an "Argument list too long" when I use E<lt>*E<gt>?

=item *

Is there a leak/bug in glob()?

=item *

How can I open a file with a leading ">" or trailing blanks?

=item *

How can I reliably rename a file?

=item *

How can I lock a file?

=item *

Why can't I just open(FH, "E<gt>file.lock")?

=item *

I still don't get locking.  I just want to increment the number in the file.  How can I do this?

=item *

All I want to do is append a small amount of text to the end of a file.  Do I still have to use locking?

=item *

How do I randomly update a binary file?

=item *

How do I get a file's timestamp in perl?

=item *

How do I set a file's timestamp in perl?

=item *

How do I print to more than one file at once?

=item *

How can I read in an entire file all at once?

=item *

How can I read in a file by paragraphs?

=item *

How can I read a single character from a file?  From the keyboard?

=item *

How can I tell whether there's a character waiting on a filehandle?

=item *

How do I do a C<tail -f> in perl?

=item *

How do I dup() a filehandle in Perl?

=item *

How do I close a file descriptor by number?

=item *

Why can't I use "C:\temp\foo" in DOS paths?  Why doesn't `C:\temp\foo.exe` work?

=item *

Why doesn't glob("*.*") get all the files?

=item *

Why does Perl let me delete read-only files?  Why does C<-i> clobber protected files?  Isn't this a bug in Perl?

=item *

How do I select a random line from a file?

=item *

Why do I get weird spaces when I print an array of lines?

=item *

How do I traverse a directory tree?

=item *

How do I delete a directory tree?

=item *

How do I copy an entire directory?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq6>: Regular Expressions

This section is surprisingly small because the rest of the FAQ is littered with answers involving regular expressions. For example, decoding a URL and checking whether something is a number are handled with regular expressions, but those answers are found elsewhere in this document (in L<perlfaq9>: "How do I decode or create those %-encodings on the web" and L<perlfaq4>: "How do I determine whether a scalar is a number/whole/integer/float", to be precise).

=over 4

=item *

How can I hope to use regular expressions without creating illegible and unmaintainable code?

=item *

I'm having trouble matching over more than one line.  What's wrong?

=item *

How can I pull out lines between two patterns that are themselves on different lines?

=item *

How do I match XML, HTML, or other nasty, ugly things with a regex?

=item *

I put a regular expression into $/ but it didn't work. What's wrong?

=item *

How do I substitute case insensitively on the LHS while preserving case on the RHS?

=item *

How can I make C<\w> match national character sets?

=item *

How can I match a locale-smart version of C</[a-zA-Z]/>?

=item *

How can I quote a variable to use in a regex?

=item *

What is C</o> really for?

=item *

How do I use a regular expression to strip C style comments from a file?

=item *

Can I use Perl regular expressions to match balanced text?

=item *

What does it mean that regexes are greedy?  How can I get around it?

=item *

How do I process each word on each line?

=item *

How can I print out a word-frequency or line-frequency summary?

=item *

How can I do approximate matching?

=item *

How do I efficiently match many regular expressions at once?

=item *

Why don't word-boundary searches with C<\b> work for me?

=item *

Why does using $&, $`, or $' slow my program down?

=item *

What good is C<\G> in a regular expression?

=item *

Are Perl regexes DFAs or NFAs?  Are they POSIX compliant?

=item *

What's wrong with using grep in a void context?

=item *

How can I match strings with multibyte characters?

=item *

How do I match a regular expression that's in a variable?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq7>: General Perl Language Issues

General Perl language issues that don't clearly fit into any of the other sections.

=over 4

=item *

Can I get a BNF/yacc/RE for the Perl language?

=item *

What are all these $@%&* punctuation signs, and how do I know when to use them?

=item *

Do I always/never have to quote my strings or use semicolons and commas?

=item *

How do I skip some return values?

=item *

How do I temporarily block warnings?

=item *

What's an extension?

=item *

Why do Perl operators have different precedence than C operators?

=item *

How do I declare/create a structure?

=item *

How do I create a module?

=item *

How do I adopt or take over a module already on CPAN?

=item *

How do I create a class?

=item *

How can I tell if a variable is tainted?

=item *

What's a closure?

=item *

What is variable suicide and how can I prevent it?

=item *

How can I pass/return a {Function, FileHandle, Array, Hash, Method, Regex}?

=item *

How do I create a static variable?

=item *

What's the difference between dynamic and lexical (static) scoping?  Between local() and my()?

=item *

How can I access a dynamic variable while a similarly named lexical is in scope?

=item *

What's the difference between deep and shallow binding?

=item *

Why doesn't "my($foo) = E<lt>FILEE<gt>;" work right?

=item *

How do I redefine a builtin function, operator, or method?

=item *

What's the difference between calling a function as &foo and foo()?

=item *

How do I create a switch or case statement?

=item *

How can I catch accesses to undefined variables, functions, or methods?

=item *

Why can't a method included in this same file be found?

=item *

How can I find out my current or calling package?

=item *

How can I comment out a large block of perl code?

=item *

How do I clear a package?

=item *

How can I use a variable as a variable name?

=item *

What does "bad interpreter" mean?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq8>: System Interaction

This section of the Perl FAQ covers questions involving operating system interaction. Topics include interprocess communication (IPC), control over the user-interface (keyboard, screen and pointing devices), and most anything else not related to data manipulation. Read the FAQs and documentation specific to the port of perl to your operating system (eg, L<perlvms>, L<perlplan9>, ...). These should contain more detailed information on the vagaries of your perl.

=over 4

=item *

How do I find out which operating system I'm running under?

=item *

How come exec() doesn't return?

=item *

How do I do fancy stuff with the keyboard/screen/mouse?

=item *

How do I print something out in color?

=item *

How do I read just one key without waiting for a return key?

=item *

How do I check whether input is ready on the keyboard?

=item *

How do I clear the screen?

=item *

How do I get the screen size?

=item *

How do I ask the user for a password?

=item *

How do I read and write the serial port?

=item *

How do I decode encrypted password files?

=item *

How do I start a process in the background?

=item *

How do I trap control characters/signals?

=item *

How do I modify the shadow password file on a Unix system?

=item *

How do I set the time and date?

=item *

How can I sleep() or alarm() for under a second?

=item *

How can I measure time under a second?

=item *

How can I do an atexit() or setjmp()/longjmp()? (Exception handling)

=item *

Why doesn't my sockets program work under System V (Solaris)?  What does the error message "Protocol not supported" mean?

=item *

How can I call my system's unique C functions from Perl?

=item *

Where do I get the include files to do ioctl() or syscall()?

=item *

Why do setuid perl scripts complain about kernel problems?

=item *

How can I open a pipe both to and from a command?

=item *

Why can't I get the output of a command with system()?

=item *

How can I capture STDERR from an external command?

=item *

Why doesn't open() return an error when a pipe open fails?

=item *

What's wrong with using backticks in a void context?

=item *

How can I call backticks without shell processing?

=item *

Why can't my script read from STDIN after I gave it EOF (^D on Unix, ^Z on MS-DOS)?

=item *

How can I convert my shell script to perl?

=item *

Can I use perl to run a telnet or ftp session?

=item *

How can I write expect in Perl?

=item *

Is there a way to hide perl's command line from programs such as "ps"?

=item *

I {changed directory, modified my environment} in a perl script.  How come the change disappeared when I exited the script?  How do I get my changes to be visible?

=item *

How do I close a process's filehandle without waiting for it to complete?

=item *

How do I fork a daemon process?

=item *

How do I find out if I'm running interactively or not?

=item *

How do I timeout a slow event?

=item *

Wie kann ich CPU-Begrenzungen setzen?

=item *

Wie kann ich Zombies auf einem Unix-System vermeiden?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine SQL-Datenbank benutzen?

=item *

Wie kann ich ein system() mit Strg-C beenden?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine Datei ohne blockierung öffnen?

=item *

Wie kann ich den zwischen Fehlern von der Shell und perl unterscheiden?

=item *

Wie kann ich ein Modul von CPAN installieren?

=item *

Was ist der Unterschied zwischen require und use?

=item *

Wie kann ich mein Verzeichnis für eigene Module/Bibliotheken pflegen?

=item *

Wie kann ich das Verzeichnis, in dem mein Programm liegt, zum Suchpfad für Module/Bibliotheken hinzufügen?

=item *

Wie kann ich ein Verzeichnis zu meinem Include-Pfad (@INC) zur Laufzeit hinzufügen?

=item *

Was ist socket.ph und wo kann ich es bekommen?

=back


=head2 L<perlfaq9>: Netzwerke

Netzwerke, das Internet und einiges über das Web.

=over 4

=item *

Wie ist die korrekte Form einer Antwort von einem CGI-Skript?

=item *

Mein CGI-Skript läuft von der Kommandozeile aus, aber nicht im Browser. (500 Server Error)

=item *

Wie kann ich bessere Fehlermeldungen von einem CGI-Programm bekommen?

=item *

Wie kann ich HTML aus einem String entfernen?

=item *

Wie kann ich URLs extrahieren?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine Datei von der Maschine des Benutzers herunterladen? Wie kann ich eine
Datei auf einer anderen Maschine öffnen?

=item *

Wie mache ich ein HTML Pop-Up-Menü mit Perl?

=item *

Wie rufe ich eine HTML-Datei ab?

=item *

Wie kann ich HTML-Formulare automatisiert abschicken?

=item *

Wie kann ich diese %-Kodierung im Web dekodieren oder erzeugen?

=item *

Wie kann ich auf eine andere Seite weiterleiten?

=item *

Wie kann ich ein Passwort auf meiner Webseite einbauen?

=item *

Wie kann ich meine .htpasswd und .htgroup Dateien mit Perl bearbeiten?

=item *

Wie kann ich sicherstellen, dass Benutzer keine Daten eingeben können, die mein CGI-Skript böse Sachen
machen lassen?

=item *

Wie kann ich einen Mail-Header parsen?

=item *

Wie dekodiere ich ein CGI-Formular?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine gültige Mail-Adresse prüfen?

=item *

Wie kann ich einen MIME/BASE64-String dekodieren?

=item *

Wie kann ich die Mail-Adresse des Users zurückgeben?

=item *

Wie verschicke ich Mails?

=item *

Wie kann ich MIME für einen Anhang an einer Mail benutzen?

=item *

Wie lese ich Mails?

=item *

Wie kann ich meinen Hostnamen, Domainnamen oder IP-Adresse herausfinden?

=item *

Wie kann ich einen News-Artikel oder die aktive Newsgroup holen?

=item *

Wie kann ich eine Datei per FTP holen/hochladen?

=item *

Wie kann ich RPC in Perl machen?

=back
